[Music]
so when you're surrounded by enemies and
everything's at stake what would you
choose overwhelming force or a cunning
and subtle tactic don't answer too
quickly after this story about a small
ship that escaped an entire Japanese
fleet by disguising itself as a tropical
island you may change your mind
naval combat is a fearsome thing the
only thing a crew can rely on is their
ship their destinies are intertwined if
a ship is in danger its crew is in
danger too when the battle is already
lost and they have a directive to
retreat saving their ship is the highest
priority the battle of the Java Sea was
nothing less than a tragedy for Allied
forces in world war ii they bought one
day of preparation for the Dutch East
Indies Dutch colonies then and Indonesia
now but the invasion of the Japanese
force was inevitable
the Japanese fleet had four cruisers and
fourteen destroyers one of the most
fearsome vessels in world war ii for
comparison the Allied fleet of Dutch
Australian American and British naval
forces had only nine destroyers and
their cruisers had fewer weapons than
the Japanese and not to mention the
superior air force of the invaders the
notorious Imperial Japanese air force
swarmed the skies the Battle of the Java
Sea started on February 27th 1942 after
seven dreadful hours of fighting the
whole Allied fleet was destroyed with
just a few lucky exceptions one of those
exceptions was a small ship H nmls
Abraham crine sin'
it wasn't exactly a battling force with
only one 3-inch gun and two 20
millimeter cannons not quite enough to
face 14 destroyers right it was a Dutch
minesweeper serving at the shore of the
Dutch East Indies when the outcome of
the battle became obvious they Abraham
crimson received this new directive
retreat but where Japanese forces were
everywhere the closest safe place was
Australia
and that's a thousand miles through
waters thoroughly monitored by the enemy
but an order is an order and having a
single chance in a million is better
than having none at all
for similar ships try to escape but soon
it was the last ship standing or
floating with the top speed of 15 knots
and it's small but quite noticeable
sighs there was absolutely no way of
escaping the Japanese force still
against all odds this vulnerable
minesweeper reached Australia in eight
days but how well it took one very
clever and daring idea after dark the
captain ordered for the ship to be
secured to the nearest tropical island
then the crew decorated the top of the
ship with tropical tree branches and all
sorts of foliage the lower rear sides of
the ship were painted gray to mimic the
rocky shore after its tropical makeover
the ship continued on its way to safety
but of course a moving island 184 feet
long and 25 feet wide wouldn't fool
anybody so it was only moving at night
and floating all day near other tropical
islands it met on its way radar scanning
was only a rising technology in 1942 so
Japanese ships had no access to it and
the visual deception worked the Abraham
Cranston is intact to this very day
docked at the Dutch navy Museum where it
was saved for preservation in 1995
disguising a ship is an island to avoid
a fearsome foe is one thing imagine
disguising a tropical island as a
heavily weaponized ship now that would
be awesome well something like this was
implemented during World War two on a
really big scale set your imagination
free for a moment what would your
reaction be if you saw four soldiers
lifting a tank with ease and moving it
away there's a lot of evidence from
people all around Europe especially from
France who saw just that some of them
even thought that American soldiers had
some kind of superpower
the truth was much simpler and equally
as interesting this was the 23rd special
troops in action moving dummy tanks
across the disposition of an imaginary
army they recalled the ghost army and
for a good reason their first and main
task was pretending to be a huge
military force while in fact consisting
of only 1,100 men arranged in four units
each of these units had a strict
specialization and each one of them was
a virtuoso in it the first unit
broadcasted fake radio transmissions to
imitate chatter between different units
of an army the second one was all about
those dummies tanks made of rubber
planes from wood and cloth fake jeeps
and artillery you name it their
creations were so close to the real
thing they fooled the enemy into
thinking that huge Allied forces were
gathering in their location the third
unit was the combat engineering in it
and the last one is probably the most
interesting of them all the sonic
deception unit it's not enough to make a
visual semblance of an army
it should also sound like an army the
sonic deception unit had it covered they
played round-the-clock recordings of
different sound effects the clanking of
machine repair the roaring of engines
and even the random noises that a
massive group of soldiers would make the
ghost army ran more than 22 deception
operations am I the only one who thinks
that those guys deserve more movies made
about them and speaking of movies
where's the all new Hollywood
blockbuster about the Jay WA cop eration
this story is just insane let's return
to Australia and talk about the revenge
allied forces took upon the Japanese
fleet with just fourteen men and only
six of them were army officers the other
eight people were just sailors they sank
six Japanese ships without any firepower
rest assured this raid was only a
success because of careful planning with
a good mix of deception they used a
small non-military vessel called a crate
to save themselves from any suspicion
they pretended to be moe
a fisherman well by today's standards
dyeing your skin to look like another
race can be depending on the context
socially inappropriate in the time of
World War two it was a matter of life
and death and let's not forget that
those brave and slightly crazy people on
board the crate did even more than that
they paid a lot of attention to what
garbage they threw overboard if a ship
carrying Asian soldiers is leaving a
trail of European trash that would raise
the suspicions of Japanese naval
officers under knight's cover six
Australian and British officers snuck
mines onto seven Japanese ships and sank
six of them during all this time no one
even noticed the saboteurs and they were
able to return home untouched Wow how
sneaky huh so which of these stories
were the most interesting to you let me
know down in the comments if you learned
something new today then give this video
a like share it with your friend and
here are some more cool videos to check
out from the bright side of life